Restructures kNN documentation into a clearer page hierarchy (#7138)
elastic/docs-content: solutions/search/vector/knn/approximate-knn.md

---
navigation_title: Approximate kNN search

> description: Run fast, scalable approximate k-nearest neighbor (kNN) vector search in Elasticsearch using dense_vector fields and HNSW indexing.

Reviewer: why only HNSW, we also have other methods.

Suggestion: " Run fast, scalable approximate k-nearest neighbor (kNN) vector search in Elasticsearch, including search methods, indexing considerations, and limitations."

applies_to:
  stack:
  serverless:
---

# Approximate kNN search

Approximate kNN search uses graph-based or clustered index structures to find similar vectors quickly at scale. Use it for most production workloads where low latency matters more than perfect recall. This page covers approximate kNN search methods, running a basic approximate kNN search, indexing considerations, and limitations.

::::{tip}
If you use `semantic_text` fields, query them with a [`match` query](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-match-query.md) for the simplest approach, or use the [`knn` query](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-knn-query.md#knn-query-with-semantic-text) when you need more control over the search.
::::

::::{warning}

> Approximate kNN search has specific resource requirements. For instance, for HNSW, all vector data must fit in the node’s page cache for efficient performance. Refer to the [approximate kNN tuning guide](/deploy-manage/production-guidance/optimize-performance/approximate-knn-search.md) for configuration tips.

Reviewer 2: These backticks are a pet peeve for me and easy cleanup while you're moving this content, but also fine to ignore this if you have bigger fish to fry :)
```suggestion
Approximate kNN search has specific resource requirements. For instance, for HNSW, all vector data must fit in the node's page cache for efficient performance. Refer to the [approximate kNN tuning guide](/deploy-manage/production-guidance/optimize-performance/approximate-knn-search.md) for configuration tips.
```

## Run a basic approximate kNN search [approximate-knn-example]

Follow these steps to map `dense_vector` fields, index embeddings, and run a basic approximate kNN query.

1. Map one or more `dense_vector` fields. Approximate kNN search requires the following mapping options:

    * A `similarity` value. This value determines the similarity metric used to score documents based on similarity between the query and document vector. For a list of available metrics, see the [`similarity`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/dense-vector.md#dense-vector-similarity) parameter documentation. The `similarity` setting defaults to `cosine`.

    ```console
    PUT image-index
    {
      "mappings": {
        "properties": {
          "image-vector": {
            "type": "dense_vector",
            "dims": 3,
            "similarity": "l2_norm"
          },
          "title-vector": {
            "type": "dense_vector",
            "dims": 5,
            "similarity": "l2_norm"
          },
          "title": {
            "type": "text"
          },
          "file-type": {
            "type": "keyword"
          }
        }
      }
    }
    ```

> 2. Index your data with embeddings.  

Reviewer 2: > 2. Index your data with embeddings.  

Something for future consideration: It would be nice to have a link to more info about how/where users get these values, since this example alone doesn't explain how you come up with those values. I assume it's a "bring your own vectors" context so maybe even just calling that out?

Reviewer: Resolved!

::::

## Indexing considerations for approximate kNN search [knn-indexing-considerations]

For approximate kNN, {{es}} stores dense vector values per segment as an [HNSW graph](https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09320) or per segment as clusters using [DiskBBQ](https://www.elastic.co/search-labs/blog/diskbbq-elasticsearch-introduction). Building these approximate kNN structures is compute-intensive, which means indexing vectors can be time-consuming. As a result, you might need to increase client request timeouts for index and bulk operations. The [approximate kNN tuning guide](/deploy-manage/production-guidance/optimize-performance/approximate-knn-search.md) covers indexing performance, sizing, and configuration trade-offs that affect search performance.

{applies_to}`stack: ga 9.2` In addition to search-time parameters, HNSW and DiskBBQ expose index-time settings that balance graph build cost, search speed, and accuracy. When defining your `dense_vector` mapping, use [`index_options`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/dense-vector.md#dense-vector-index-options) to set these parameters:

> ::::{tip}

Reviewer 2: > ::::{tip}

IMO this tip should follow the example, since it distance s the explanation (ending with colon) from the example it's referring to.
